\documentclass{letter}

\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}

\date{}
\signature{Jason K. Moore}
\address{2420 37th St \\ Sacramento, CA USA 95817}

\begin{document}

\begin{letter}{
  Department of Kinesiology \\
  School of Public Health and Health Sciences \\
  University of Massachusetts Amherst \\
  30 Eastman Lane \\
  Amherst, MA 01003
}

\opening{Dear Search Committee:}

I am writing to apply for a ``Assistant Professor - Biomechanics'' in the
Kinesiology Department. I am currently an Assistant Professor of Teaching in
the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department at the University of
California, Davis. My position is an academic senate tenure-track position
primarily focused on advancing undergraduate engineering education. I have been
in this position for over four years and my accomplishments over those years
align mostly with this position's teaching focus but I have also maintained a
research program centered on human mobility in transportation, sports, and
assistive technologies. Prior to this position, I was a postdoctoral researcher
the field of human motion and control with applications in powered lower limb
prostheses and before that a graduate student with research in bicycle-rider
dynamics, control, and handling in a sport biomechanics lab.

My current research trajectory is focused on developing human-machine
synergistic controllers for powered exoskeletons, powered prostheses, and
personal mobility vehicles, particularly single track vehicles. These assistive
devices will play a significant role in how the abled and disabled get around
in the future. Biomechanics and the study of human motion through data driven
control identification play a central role in my research methods and I would
bring specific expertise in computational modeling and optimal control of
musculoskeletal systems as well as experimental biomechanics to your
department.

I have a strong record of obtaining competitive funding. As a graduate student,
I initiated and co-authored an awarded NSF grant to study the control of
bicycles which was unique in both from the student initiative and making the
case to fund an oft-harder to fund topic. I was also awarded a very selective
Fulbright Scholarship to the Netherlands. More recently, I was co-PI on a
successful \$5M grant from the US Department of Education.

My extensive teaching record includes courses in the topics of mechanical
design, vibrations, system dynamics, multibody dynamics, and vehicle dynamics.
My graduate multibody dynamics course has long been a core course in our
biomechanics training. I have mentored close to 500 BSc and MSc students in
over 100 engineering projects in the last four years. I would be interested in
teaching and developing courses in applied biomechanics, experimental methods
and instrumentation in biomechanics, applied optimal control of human movement,
and biorobotics; all of which I have extensive research experience in.

The best fit for me is at a university has a department who is mission focused,
works together forwarding this common mission, and values continuous change all
while deeply valuing engineering education through teaching and research
mentorship. I have included my research plan that centers around human mobility
and a teaching statement that outlines my pedagogical practices.

Thank you for your consideration.

\closing{Sincerely,}

\end{letter}
\end{document}
