\documentclass{letter}

\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}

\date{}
\signature{Jason K. Moore}
\address{2420 37th St \\ Sacramento, CA USA 95817}

\begin{document}

\begin{letter}{
  School \\
  Address
}

\opening{Dear Search Committee:}

I am writing to apply for the ``Assistant/Associate Professor (tenure track) in
Dynamics of Multibody systems'' in the department of biomechanical engineering
at TU Delft. I am currently an Assistant Professor of Teaching in the
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department at the University of
California, Davis. My position is an academic senate tenure-track position
primarily focused on advancing undergraduate engineering education. I spend
approximately 70\% of my time on teaching and learning, 20\% on professional
achievements and activities, and 10\% on academic and public service. I have
been in this position for over four years and my accomplishments over those
years align mostly with this position's teaching focus but I have also
maintained a small research program centered on human mobility in
transportatoin, sports, and assistive technologies with much of it advancing
engineering in the dynamics and control of bicycles.

I believe that I am highly qualified for your department's advertised position.
For the last 15 years, I have developed unique research expertise in the
dynamics and control of bicycles. I have authored or co-authored over 20
journal and conference articles on the subject and my doctoral work focused
almost exclusively on the topic, resulting in a dissertation entitled ``Human
Control of a Bicycle'' which is well cited. I have published X number of other
papers, many of which are anscilary support for the bicycle dynamics and
control research. These works and my active role in the associated academic
communities make me one of the handful of people in the world with the
expertise needed to take the TU Delft Bicycle Dynamics and Control lab into the
future. I also have an extensive teaching record in dynamics and design. I have
taught mechanical vibrations, system dynamics, multibody dynamics, and vehicle
dynamics and coached numerous dynamics oriented projects while teaching our
capstone mechanical design course.

As a graduate student, I initiated and co-authored an awarded US National
Science Foundation grant to study the control of bicycles which was unique in
both from the student initiative and making the case to fund an oft-harder to
fund topic. As a student, I was also awarded a very selective Fulbright
Scholarship to the Netherlands, where I spent a productive year in the bicycle
dynamics lab.

The best fit for me is at a university has a department who is
mission focused, works together forwarding this common mission, and values
continuous change all while deeply valuing engineering education through
teaching and research mentorship.

My current research trajectory is focused on developing human-machine
synergistic controllers for powered exoskeletons, powered prostheses, and
human-scale mobility vehicles, particularly single track vehicles. These
assistive devices will play a significant role in how the abled and disabled
get around in the future.

I have included my research plan that centers around human mobility and a
teaching statement that outlines my pedagogical practices in addition to how I
think I would fit into your department.

Thank you for your consideration.

\closing{Sincerely,}

\end{letter}
\end{document}
